veps/NNNN-vep-template/vep.md, before:

# VEP #NNNN: Your short, descriptive title

## Release Signoff Checklist

Items marked with (R) are required *prior to targeting to a milestone / release*.

- [ ] (R) Enhancement issue created, which links to VEP dir in [kubevirt/enhancements] (not the initial VEP PR)

## Overview

<!--
Provide a brief overview of the topic)
-->

## Motivation

<!--
Why this enhancement is important
-->

## Goals

<!--
The desired outcome
-->

## Non Goals

<!--
Why this enhancement is important Limitations to the scope of the design
<!--

## Definition of Users

<!--
Who is this feature set intended for
-->

## User Stories

<!--
List of user stories this design aims to solve
-->

## Repos

<!--
List of repose this design impacts
-->

## Design

<!--
This should be brief and concise. We want just enough to get the point across
-->

## API Examples

<!--
Tangible API examples used for discussion
-->

## Alternatives

<!--
Outline any alternative designs that have been considered)
-->

## Scalability

<!--
Overview of how the design scales)
-->

## Update/Rollback Compatibility

<!--
Does this impact update compatibility and how?)
-->

## Functional Testing Approach

<!--
An overview on the approaches used to functional test this design)
-->

## Implementation Phases

<!--
How/if this design will get broken up into multiple phases)
-->

## Feature lifecycle Phases

<!--
How and when will the feature progress through the Alpha, Beta and GA lifecycle phases

Refer to https://github.com/kubevirt/community/blob/main/design-proposals/feature-lifecycle.md#releases for more details
-->

### Alpha

### Beta

### GA

Commit message:

2nd iteration of the process (#13)
* Add Targert version and graduation criteria checklist

This was identified as required checklist points in order
to remove any ambiguity.

Signed-off-by: Luboslav Pivarc <lpivarc@redhat.com>

* Add various tracking guides to issue template

Make sure the contributor tracks following:
VEP, code, docs PRs.

Signed-off-by: Luboslav Pivarc <lpivarc@redhat.com>

* Typo

Signed-off-by: Luboslav Pivarc <lpivarc@redhat.com>

* Mark "Migrate one or two active designs to test the process." as completed

Signed-off-by: Luboslav Pivarc <lpivarc@redhat.com>

* Document responsibilities

Signed-off-by: Luboslav Pivarc <lpivarc@redhat.com>
Co-authored-by: fossedihelm <ffossemo@redhat.com>

---------

Signed-off-by: Luboslav Pivarc <lpivarc@redhat.com>
Co-authored-by: fossedihelm <ffossemo@redhat.com>

veps/NNNN-vep-template/vep.md, after:

# VEP #NNNN: Your short, descriptive title

## Release Signoff Checklist

Items marked with (R) are required *prior to targeting to a milestone / release*.

- [ ] (R) Enhancement issue created, which links to VEP dir in [kubevirt/enhancements] (not the initial VEP PR)
- [ ] (R) Target version is explicitly mentioned and approved
- [ ] (R) Graduation criteria filled

## Overview

<!--
Provide a brief overview of the topic)
-->

## Motivation

<!--
Why this enhancement is important
-->

## Goals

<!--
The desired outcome
-->

## Non Goals

<!--
Why this enhancement is important Limitations to the scope of the design
<!--

## Definition of Users

<!--
Who is this feature set intended for
-->

## User Stories

<!--
List of user stories this design aims to solve
-->

## Repos

<!--
List of repose this design impacts
-->

## Design

<!--
This should be brief and concise. We want just enough to get the point across
-->

## API Examples

<!--
Tangible API examples used for discussion
-->

## Alternatives

<!--
Outline any alternative designs that have been considered)
-->

## Scalability

<!--
Overview of how the design scales)
-->

## Update/Rollback Compatibility

<!--
Does this impact update compatibility and how?)
-->

## Functional Testing Approach

<!--
An overview on the approaches used to functional test this design)
-->

## Implementation Phases

<!--
How/if this design will get broken up into multiple phases)
-->

## Feature lifecycle Phases

<!--
How and when will the feature progress through the Alpha, Beta and GA lifecycle phases

Refer to https://github.com/kubevirt/community/blob/main/design-proposals/feature-lifecycle.md#releases for more details
-->

### Alpha

### Beta

### GA
